---
layout: mathjax
title: Homework 6
---

## Homework 6 (100 pts)

_This problem set is due Wednesday (11/16/2016) at 11:59pm. Please turn in your
work by uploading to Canvas. f you have questions, please post them on the
course forum, rather than emailing the course staff. This will allow other
students with the same question to see the response and any ensuing discussion.
The goal of this problem set is to review clustering through the process of
spike sorting action potentials data. You should submit both commented code and
a write-up for this homework assignment._


### Description of data set
The dataset for this problem is linked in the numpy file [SpikeData.npz](), which
contains numpy arrays, `RawData` and `SpikeWaveforms`.

* `RawData`: This is a matrix of raw data recorded from a tetrode (a four
channel electrode) in the hippocampus.  The sampling rate is 30 kHz, and the
data are simultaneous voltage signals (in μV) from each channel. I considered
having you do the spike extraction for this data - this involves two steps (1)
filtering out LFP (600 Hz 2-pole highpass and 1-pole 11 kHz low pass and (2)
finding instances where one of the channels crosses a threshold value. For the
sake of time, I decided to do this for you. You can see the files
`Threshold.m` and `extractSpikes.m`.

* `SpikeWaveforms` : This is a matrix of action potential waveforms sampled
simultaneously on all four channels of the tetrode. The size is $$M\times 40
\times 4$$, where $$M = 12940$$ is the number of action potentials detected,
and the recorded portion of the action potential waveform ("snippet") is in a
40 sample window around the threshold crossing.


### Questions

1. _Plot the spike waveforms (10 pts)_

    Make a "voltage vs time" plot of the data from channel one of the action
    potential waveform matrix. Identify the threshold value and threshold times
    with lines.What threshold value was used for these spike snippets? How many
    samples before the threshold are included in each snippet? (Keep in mind that
    a snippet is stored each time any channel crosses threshold, so you'll need to
    consider all channels.)


2. _Plot the spike peaks in 4-D space (10 pts)_

    Find the peak amplitude (post-threshold) of each snippet on each channel.
    Make a 6 subplot figure showing a point in each panel for each detected
    action potential. The point should be the peak amplitude on channel A vs the
    peak amplitude on channel B, where A and B are the combinatorial pairs
    within {1; 2; 3; 4} (i.e., 1 vs. 2, 1 vs. 3, etc.).


3. _Clustering with K-Means (40 pts)_


    Note that SciPy has an implementation of K-means. For this assignment,
    however, you are to implement your own version of it. Use your
    implementation to determine the neuron responsible for each recorded spike.
    Use only the data from the first channel of the tetrode. You may only use
    basic  NumPy commands, i.e. linear algebra and functions that you would find
    on a graphing calculator. Treat each snippet as a point in  $$\mathbf{x}_m
    \in \mathbb{R}^D, \, m\in \lbrace 1, 2, \ldots M \rbrace$$, where $$D$$ is
    40, the length of each snippet, and $$M$$ is the  total number of snippets.
    In this problem, we will assume there are $$K = 2$$ neurons contributing
    spikes to the recorded waveform. For computational simplicity, use only the
    first 2000 snippets ($$M = 2000$$).


    **a.** For each cluster (_k_ = 1, 2), create a separate "voltage versus
    time" plot containing the following:

    * the cluster center $$\boldsymbol \mu_k$$ generated by K-Means as a red waveform trace (i.e., the prototypical action potential for the _k_-th neuron and

    * all of the waveform snippets assigned to the _k_-th cluster

    **b.** Plot the objective number $$J$$ versus iteration number (as in Figure 9.2
    in _PRML_). How many iterations did it take for K-Means to converge?

    **c.** Repeat the problem with K = 3 clusters.

4. _Gaussian Mixtures (20 pts)_

    **THIS QUESTION IS INCLUDED ONLY FOR REFERENCE - DO NOT TURN IN.**

    Consider the plot of snippet peaks you made for problem (2). The clouds of
    points you find do not seem circular. Thus, we'd like to find clusters that
    would fit to the shape of what we observe. This is a case where a Gaussian
    mixture model can work really well. In class, we derived the EM algorithm
    for the Gaussian mixture model by taking derivatives of the data likelihood
    $$\Pr(\lbrace \mathbf{x} \rbrace \vert \theta)$$, where $$\lbrace \mathbf{x}
    \rbrace$$ represents the training data  $$\mathbf{x}_1, \mathbf{x}_2,
    \ldots, \mathbf{x}_M$$, and $$\theta$$ represents all the model parameters
    $${\boldsymbol \mu}_k, {\boldsymbol\Sigma}_k, \text{ and } \pi_k, (k = 1,
    \ldots, K)$$. An alternate approach is to apply the general EM algorithm
    (shown on p. 440-441 in _PRML_) to the Gaussian mixture model. Both
    approaches should yield the same update equations, which we will show in
    this problem.

    The Gaussian mixture model is defined by the prior probability of each
    mixture component indexed by $$z$$:

    $$\Pr(z = k) = \pi_k$$

    and the conditional distribution of the data point $#\mathbf{x}#$ given the
    mixture component

    $$
    \Pr(\mathbf{x} \vert z = k) =
      \mathcal{N} (\mathbf{x} \vert \boldsymbol \mu_k, \boldsymbol \Sigma_k)
    $$

    where $$k = 1, \ldots, K$$. We will denote the _n_-th data point as
    $$\mathbf{x}_n$$ and its corresponding latent variable
    as $$z_n$$, where $$n = 1, \ldots, N$$.

    **a.** In the **E-step** of the general EM algorithm, we evaluate
    $$\Pr(z_n = k \vert \mathbf{x}_n)$$. For the Gaussian mixture
    model, show that

    $$
    \Pr(z = k \vert \mathbf{x}_n) = \frac{\mathcal{N}(\mathbf{x}_n \vert \boldsymbol \mu_k, \boldsymbol \Sigma_k) \pi_k}%
    {\sum_{j=1}^K \mathcal{N}(\mathbf{x}_n \vert \boldsymbol \mu_j, \boldsymbol \Sigma_j) \pi_j}
    $$

    **b.** In the **M-step** of the general EM algorithm, we maximize the
    expected log joint distribution (summed across all $$N$$ data points)

    $$
    \begin{split}
    \mathcal{Q}(\theta) &=\sum_{n=1}^N \text{E}\left[\log \Pr(\mathbf{x}_n, z_n \vert \theta)\right] \\
     &=\sum_{n=1}^N \sum_{k=1}^K \Pr(z_n=k \vert \mathbf{x}_n) \log \Pr(\mathbf{x}_n, z_n \vert \theta)
     \end{split}
    $$

    with respect to the model parameters $$\theta$$. Note that the expectation
    above is taken with respect to the distribution found in the E-step in part
    **(a)**. We seek to find

    $$
    \theta^{\text{new}} = \underset{\theta}{\text{argmax}} \mathcal{Q}(\theta).
    $$

    For the Gaussian mixture model, let $$\gamma_{nk} = \Pr(z_n = k \vert
    \mathbf{x}_n)$$ for notational simplicity. By maximizing
    $$\mathcal{Q}(\theta)$$ with respect to each of the model parameters, show
    that

    $$
    \begin{split}
    \boldsymbol \mu_k^{\text{new}} &= \frac{1}{N_k} \sum_{n=1}^N \gamma_{n k} \mathbf{x}_n \\
    \boldsymbol \Sigma_k^{\text{new}} &= \frac{1}{N_k} \sum_{n=1}^N \gamma_{n k} (\mathbf{x}_n - \boldsymbol \mu_k) (\mathbf{x}_n - \boldsymbol \mu_k)^T \\
    \pi_k^{\text{new}} &= \frac{N_k}{N}
    \end{split}
    $$

    where $$N_k = \sum_{n=1}^N \gamma_{n k}$$.

    _(Hint: The distribution found in the E-step, $$\Pr(z_n = k \vert
    \mathbf{x}_n$$, should be treated as a fixed distribution (with no
    parameters) in the M-step. In other words, the $$\gamma_{n k}$$ should be
    treated as constants in $$\mathcal{Q}(\theta)$$. The model parameters should
    only appear in the joint distribution $$\Pr(\mathcal{x}_n, z_n \vert
    \theta)$$.)_


5. _Using Gaussian Mixtures (40 pts)_

    In python, the scikit-learn package has nice support for mixture models.

   ```python
   from sklearn import mixture
   gmix = mixture.GMM(n_components=2, covariance_type='full')
   gmix.fit(peaks)
   ```

    You will use this package to define and train a model of the 4-channel
    waveform peaks.

    **a.** Use the first 5000 snippet-peaks (i.e., $$\mathbf{x}_n \in
    \mathcal{R}^4$$ are the peak of the spike snippet in each tetrode channel
    for $$n = 1, \ldots 5000$$ snippets), and learn the Gaussian mixture
    parameters for $$K=10$$ neurons. Plot the resulting cluster assignments in a
    six panel plot as in **(2)** with the clusters color-coded. [A well
    documented example can be found in from the scikit-learn docs](
    http://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/mixture/plot_gmm_covariances.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-mixture-plot-gmm-covariances-py).

    **b.**  Find the cluster assignments for the next 5000 snippet-peaks, and
    plot them as in **(a)**. You will use these as test data to evaluate how many
    clusters there should be in the data. Calculate the model likelihood of
    the second set of 5000 snippet-peaks using the parameters you found in
    **(a)**. Now, repeat the EM-learning in **(a)**, but with $$K = 8, 9, \ldots,
    20$$. What is the likelihood of the test data for each model? Which model
    would you use if you wanted only well-clustered neurons for your analysis?
